It's, uh, Mr.
Mrs. Cough. Yes.
You, yes.
Casey. A special What is what I do?
It's all from, I just know.
Let know that Rachel hooking. Boy, boy.
It's happened all week. It good.
It's been a long two days joined.
Alright, so what we're now we've got you
for, um, 10 minutes.
We've got the officials in the room.
Um, we'll just do an introduction of ourselves for everyone,
um, to say that only having to do once.
Greg O'Connor, um, labor MP and the chair of the committee.
Greg Fleming, electorate MP
for Monga Care here in Central Auckland.
And David Cleod, national MP for Diplomas.
Steve Abel, uh, green member
of Parliament based in West Auckland.
Alright, so thank you everyone.
So now we've got, uh, you good. 10 minutes.
Uh, feel free to introduce yourselves.
Um, your submission has been read.
Um, however, for the 10 minutes you can use as you will
and hopefully leave time for questions. Floor yours.
Cool. Um, well, Tracy, who's a cake designer.
I'm Ben, and this is my partner Paul, Dr.
With one copy cart and Nelson
and Tracy from, um,
I'm just gonna read off the screen, sorry.
We represent small
and micro food business owners across who since, uh,
the Food Act came into force, have been burdened
with extortionately high costs
and unnecessarily complicated food safety compliance.
NPIs new Levy is about to make this worse,
our concerns have already been brought
to government's attention and have been either ignored
or dismissed in the pursuit of strong trade agendas To cut
to the chase one morning,
or, uh, sorry, my one morning a week coffee cart just on
Saturdays does not have the same risks involved
as a 100 seat restaurant with 10 staff
that sells raw oysters.
But my fees and regulatory burden are the
same as a large business.
Long before I got into this industry,
many food businesses were disappearing along
with a rich diversity.
I could no longer buy sauerkraut
or tofu at my local, my local market
and my ex supply could no longer afford
and sustain the burden of reg burden of regulation.
And the, um, national Supreme Award-winning vegan sausage
lady also disappeared.
And she recently, um, we bumped into each other
and she shared that it was really due
to unworkable compliance costs, Loss of small,
unique business from our city center
and a lack of opportunity for them has consequences, a lack
of self-sufficiency,
fewer owners controlling their own business,
unique expertise and diverse culture can't flourish
and lower quality employment options.
Kiwis pride themselves on their ability to adapt
and thrive purely on their creativity, resilience,
and pragmatism, and an ecosystem of unnecessary
and excessive regulation.
We are stifled from thinking outside the box
and doing what we do best to be creative.
Problems with the system include audits
that can be done from an office
with no value other than tick.
Boxing authorities for, uh, sorry.
Authorities responsible for deciding whether
or not we comply
with regulation are also the ones we're supposed to go to
for support, information and education.
And we pay highly for that. It's expensive.
Ambiguously written regulations which are interpreted
differently by, um,
every verifying authority in the country.
That's, every council, uh, has very different interpretation
fees and regulatory, um, fees
and regulation do not account for risk, uh,
variations in the risk, size, value
and complexity of operation of food businesses, businesses,
uh, opting outta registration
and are operating underground due
to excessive compliance and cost burden.
And I did give you some references there.
There's one in there about, um, underground field markets.
Um, having to, uh, another issue is having
to register nationally with EPI,
whilst using the same premise just
to trade in the next suburb over, which
massively increases cost for me.
That's like, there's Richmond five minutes away,
but I have to do a much bigger registration to trade there.
Cottage industry has very limited early earning potential.
Most under about 10,000 a year. They want to be compliant.
But when we look at these costs as a percentage
of their earnings, it's totally prohibitive
and cheaper to not be registered.
A recent survey found
that 90% thought the current system does not support small
industry to make safe food or take
responsibility for food safety.
Many citing too much, uh, tick boxing and paperwork.
Two thirds said they, uh,
did not think the rules were sensible
and were too ambiguous.
80% had compliance costs over $600 per year,
and 43% are paying more than a thousand dollars per year
just in compliance costs.
And that's a lot for, for small businesses
and really micro businesses as well.
Our vision for a safe local food industry includes thorough,
uh, thorough consultation
and engagement with industry, large, small
and micro support
and, uh, education
to help us produce the safest food possible in a
practical day to day way.
And separating the regulator from the educator
and nuanced sliding scale of risk
that ensures an appropriate regulatory burden
for the type of business.
Uh, prior to the passing of the new Food Act 2014, opponents
to the new legislation including concerned members
of community and small businesses,
have emphatically rallied against it
and refreshed opposition continues to arise,
although some minor concessions were made, um,
to ensure the ACT did not impede on charities holding like a
small store or a sausage SLE for fundraising.
Government legislation did not cater
for the con cottage industry or small food business.
Uh, and the mayor of commented,
the community totally supports the need
for higher public health safety.
Uh, but some of its requirements unnecessarily restrict
local economic activity, undermines community resilience
and goodwill and challenges basic common sense.
And we totally agree with that.
Consequences that were clearly articulated
to government 15 years ago have been our reality ever since
Media releases made, uh, by the government
to promote the New Food Act claimed it would reduce
compliance costs and regulatory burden.
Not only has the burden in cost
of compliance actually skyrocketed,
every business has been subjected to the same level
of compliance, including those who are exporting.
Uh, MPI, so-called risk-based tiered approach to compliance
is out of touch with people at the lower end
of the risk scale.
A year ago, MPI noted some, uh, notified some,
but not all businesses of a new levy proposal.
It was promoted as offering better support
to food businesses by adding additional services
that would ultimately reduce some regulatory burden
and, uh, cost of compliance.
We don't have any faith in these plans.
Uh, small business owners have been o have been promised
reduced costs for, for the past 10 years or more.
Not only have our fees exponentially increased,
but support to make for, uh,
safe food has been hard to find.
Just navigating the uh, NPI website is a nightmare.
This brings me to my main point
that all food businesses trading solely within New Zealand
and particularly small
and micro businesses, are being drowned out
by a staunch government agenda for export trade.
Um, Vincent Uck, who have just uh, met behind me
of New Zealand Food Safety, he's responded
to my submission saying, uh,
the new levy was always envisaged to benefit food services.
This proposal was kept
behind closed doors without our trade associations.
Even knowing industry being consulted in the service
development would've ensured best fit for purpose
and cost efficiency of these new services
that were being developed.
Uh, in NPIs annual reports for notifications
of foodborne illness, there's a steady downward trend year
on year for almost all types of foodborne illness.
There hasn't been a, uh, sudden outplay,
sudden unexplained outbreaks of illness related to, uh,
the local food economy.
In recent history, government has introduced a new levy
without evidence to justify it.
Food producers, including charities
that are not registered present far more risk to food safety
compliant businesses, however, are excessively policed.
My reference list, um, has more info about that.
This is a symptom of overregulation and extortion costs.
If regulation was education based, learning was easier
to access and it came at a fair proportionate cost,
people would not be afraid
or overwhelmed to register officially.
So far, government strategy
to combat excessive regulation has been for NPI
to exempt some businesses from registration.
So it's recognized that there's too much regulation,
but instead of lessening the burden,
they're encouraging businesses to deregister
authorities responsible for deciding whether we comply
or not are also the ones we're supposed to go to
for support, information and education.
And we pay highly for it.
This is why, uh, compliance is a checkbox exercise
for businesses do only and exactly what they're told.
They're afraid to ask questions and seek out information.
As small business owners, we do everything
and the buck stops with us.
So industry vigi, industry vigilance, that's
industry taking, wanting to really to look
after food safety themselves would be to our advantage
because we want safe food.
It's and good for our reputation.
Uh, NPI is responsible for growing export trade as well
as food safety for local communities.
A blatant conflict of interest and it needs to be distanced.
We are sacrificing our local economies
and public health to support export trade.
Uh, they're gonna present next,
but seeking their input is kind of like hunting
with the gamekeeper 'cause there's a conflict of interest.
Uh, ministry of Health should be involved as well.
According to the WHO,
governments should make food safety a public
health priority.
Food safety and public health shouldn't be
a casualty of trade.
For 15 years, government has been brushing off our concerns.
An example being Minister Hagar's, response to one
of my letters I sent to him.
He reaffirmed the need for a strong regulatory system
that provides consumers domestically and internationally.
And without it, New Zealand would not be able
to succeed in the international market.
We are craving local growth, growth
that is fair and affordable for local economies.
Um, and our wishes
to have these concerns heard at a select committee level.
Ideally the health committee due to the conflicts
of interest I mentioned above.
We would encourage this from being heard
by the primary production
or economic development committees.
A bit discourage. Just discourage What
Do you got against this? Well,
you are, you are here now
before the petitions committee, so, uh,
it's the, so welcome.
Um, okay, we've just got time for a couple of questions.
One, do you think there should be any regulation at all in,
or should anybody be able to go to the Nelson market
and set up a food cut?
No, absolutely. We think there should be regulation
and we are talking about a more nuanced approach than just
everyone at the same level of regulation.
But we absolutely, for support regulation,
and we support all the education
and information around that to help people make safe food.
But what we don't support is it being at a, at a same level
as our export, large export companies. Sure.
Forward Questions members.
Can I just say thank you very much rain this,
and I'm really looking forward to, um, the interrogation
of your, of your, uh, analysis and both and,
and of your, um, your recommendations as well.
Think this is a a, um, yeah, it's a really,
really important issue and thank you for continuing
to push it on when, um, obviously it's been,
you feel like you've been bang head against the wall
for a number of years now, so it
would've been easy for you to give up.
So thank you for not doing that.
Thank you. Yeah. It wasn't just me all that it was,
I discovered that this has been carried
by other people before me.
Mm-hmm. And that was my amazement is, oh my God,
their concerns are word for word my concerns.
And that was 15 years ago. I couldn't believe. Yeah.
The similarity,
Mr. Thank
You. It's a very compelling
and strong submission of position.
And, um, I think you shouldn't underestimate
how much sympathy you would find at the primary production
select committee on this matter.
I think you'll find that, um,
most members of that committee,
Very supportive of
Very supportive local economy done well,
and the ability of smaller producers to have means
to sell their product locally.
And that entirely aligns with the sort
of concerns you've got about overregulation of small
Producers. Right. I,
I just, I feel like, you know,
I know this government has a very strong agenda
with the campaign to double its exports.
And I know I noticed that EPI I've put on
that handout also has, um, mirrored
that goal, that objective.
And I guess that makes me nervous that
that's become the only agenda we care about anymore
and that local economies are being left behind.
But thank you for saying that. Yeah. Oh,
I'm for fortunate. We
now have the NPI who have heard that
and we're gonna invite 'em to the table.
Yeah. So, uh, thank you very much.
Well, no, we, we are here.
There will always be, this is a whole idea of this.
We hear one side of the story, we will hear the other side
of the story and we'll report back, um, on, uh, with this,
with the wisdom of Solomon, um, from,
from the down the middle hopefully.
So thank you very much. Thank
You very much. Thank you for having
Monty.
You're welcome. Remain just you find a thank you
NPI up there, Mr.
Arbuckle. Welcome and
Wisdom of Solomon.
You go.
I've just been challenged on my wisdom of Solomon analogy.
No sorts involved.
How, how do you regulate this? Um, good afternoon.
Uh, my name is Ben. I'm the Deputy Director of General
for New Zealand Food Safety.
With me is, uh, Judy Bishop and Simon Holt.
Uh, and, um, we're just here to, just, just
to build on Ben's, uh, comments.
We've enjoyed interacting with Ben.
Um, um, Simon's particularly been down and met Ben.
Um, and we're gonna have a coffee after this
and we'll have, we'll continue the conversation.
So, um, we, um, every time we interact
with food businesses, even the smallest
ones, we learn things.
And, um, and Ben has some very valid points
and we we're gonna pick those up in the coming few months
and address, uh, as many of them as we can
because we think
that he is identified a few very practical issues.
The, the Food Act, um, as you know, governs food produced,
uh, and imported into New Zealand is about 39,000
registered businesses engaged in food production,
retail distribution.
So it's a fairly broad, broad community.
They range from large to very small.
Um, and we would say
that the food actors is reasonably calibrated, you know,
that, so, so there is, within the Food Act, various, uh,
levels of requirement for registration
and verification, largely risk based.
So it is, it isn't one sort of common standard.
Um, so that's just something we, we would say, we,
we would say that it's not perfect
and there's still room to, to ensure
that risk-based assessment is right.
And there's possibly some overregulation in some areas.
And we're very keen to continue to engage with industry
to see where we can lighten some of that work.
Remember, it's also cod with the territorial authorities.
So, um, we have a role, so many of the, a number
of the food businesses are registered directly with us.
And usually they are the larger ones
or the multi-site businesses.
The businesses that are tend to be small and singly located,
or normally be registered with one
of the 67 territorial authorities.
With that decentralized approach, there is variability.
So there's variability of charges, there's variability of,
of verification approaches by nature
of the fact's distributed.
Um, we would like to have more time
and resources to focus on improving the consistency.
And the Food Act levy will enable us to do that.
Will also enable us to, to review the regulations
that we have, make sure fine tune them,
make sure they're more fit for purpose.
It'll also enable us to engage with food businesses
and had support them as well.
Um, Greg, we've supplied original response
to the, to a petition.
Um, we're very happy to take any questions.
I'm looking forward to and having another
catch up with Ben shortly. Thank you.
Well, I think one question can ask risk based
Yep. Without
going into,
or ultimately the risk is the, the, the risk of failure.
The main risk of failure is,
Is, is, is is harming people, is public health
Risk, it's, it's a public health risk
Based risk. Yeah. So
the, the Food Act requires businesses
to ensure food is safe and then suitable.
Suitable means it's sort of appropriate for the consumer.
So the risk is the risk that, that a producer of food could,
could do something, uh, mishandle the food in the manner
that could cause, uh, a food safety issue.
So foodborne illness, uh,
or things like a, um, allergy reaction.
So the risk is solely a risk to public health.
Alright. And as far as compliance goes, um,
Ben's business is the compliance, um, from MPI
or is it one of those local TLAs It's a local
Authority. Sorry.
And if there's, and if anyone's gonna prosecute him,
Who would be the local authority?
Local authority, yes. So, so Ben is registered
with his local, his local counsel,
and he would, he would receive a verification from them on a
particular frequency depending on his performance.
And, and where his work has read his
is on that risk register.
It can be as frequently as annually or,
or as infrequently as up to three years. And
Is the, does the TLA any reporting function back
to yourselves?
They do. They, they supply us
with information on their verifications.
We have an oversight role on the system.
Um, but that is limited at the moment.
So we don't set the fee structure.
Um, there's a, there's a fair level
of autonomy at a territorial authority level.
Thank you very much. Um, Mr. Abel,
What are your responses to Ben's essential, um, complaint
that the cost of compliance is too great.
Um, that it, the burden put on a small producer is
disproportionate to, uh, their activity
and to the potential risk.
Um, and that basically, uh, you're driving,
or the regulatory framework,
I'm talking about you personally overseas,
but the, the regulatory framework, whether it's local
or national, is a massive disincentive for
small food producers
and, um, cottage industry food producers
and, um, sellers to function.
Yeah. Look, um, we recognize it's a cost burden.
Um, we recognize it's a compliance burden.
Um, like any industry though, if you're an electrician
or a plumber, you will be, it's a regulated business.
Um, have we got that balance right?
I think there's still room to keep working on that.
And we, we are very committed to working with industry
to see what we can do to keep lowering that cost and the,
and the burden that it is the price of entry though.
And it gives co it gives public confidence, you know,
in the sense that they can go to the, the market
where Ben is and,
and buy with some confidence to know that that business is
one register for this council
and receives a, a verification of some form.
Mm-hmm. So it does, it does have value, uh,
for both the public and for, and for the business itself.
But, um, is there room to make to improve it?
I think yes, definitely there is, right
The question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. I just, uh, indulged.
Um, one of the issues that, um, Ben has raised with me is
around the levies
and that the levies paid by his business, which is a,
runs once a week market,
and we have a lot of small businesses like that announced
that operate literally just one day a week.
Um, and that the levy they pay is actually comparable with,
you know, 5, 6, 7 day operations.
And that's one of the challenges is
that they don't actually bring in anywhere near
as much revenue to cover the cost of that levy.
So is there some opportunity in the system
to acknowledge actually the, the size of the operation?
Because that is one of the beauties of the Nelson market.
We have a lot of small businesses like Thes, they come in,
they literally only operate on the Saturday,
but they're paying at the same rate
as someone was doing the exact same thing, but every day.
And we do have some food carts that do operate every day,
so, you know, yeah.
But there's a flat rate. Yeah.
And yet they have 5, 6, 7 times as much revenue
as the little producers in the Nelson market.
So that's one of the particular things that Ben throws
with me that does seem on the surface to be quite unfair.
It's, it's a valid point. Mm.
Um, having said that, Ben is permitted by his registration
to operate, he could do seven days a
week to be a per hours a day.
He chooses to do one weekend.
Um, would it be possible to try and calibrate it down?
Um, it's a question of, you know, how much, how much effort
to, to, to balance the reward.
Mm. So what is it, what is his registration?
Maybe 200, two $50 a year, um, in the first year.
So could you, could you have a, a fee
that was proportionate, that was administered to be simple?
Because, you know, how would the territorial authority know
that then was only going to do it once a week?
And so that is, it's possible, I think,
but it's just the balance between the administration cost
of doing it versus the simplicity of a common,
common registration fee.
And that's what I think most council will be,
will be grappling with is administratively it is simply
to say, well, here's a standard fee.
You, you choose how frequent you want to operate.
That is your choice.
Mr. I just
Covered, when you mentioned 39,000 registered food
business, does that include all the store holders
that just operate at weekend markets, for example?
Yes, it would. Yes. And,
and then that includes all of your, you know,
your major restaurants and the like as well.
39,000. Yes. That's a lot fewer than I would've imagined.
Okay. Thank you. Do you, roughly, of those 39,000,
do you know what percentage of
that would be the likes of Benjamin
Would be like Ben?
Um, since
I don't think we've ever had that announcement.
We, again, we, we don't actually collect data
on the size of businesses.
Right. Okay. Yeah. It's, it's all, all we know the number
of registration that is, uh,
only talking businesses registered under the Food Act.
There is also the Animal Products Act and the Wine Act.
Yes. Yeah. But I imagining, I imagine the former is
what most of these silver example Saturday markets,
it'd be fascinating to know that, just
'cause when I think of the number, when I think
of the proliferation of markets all around the country,
and each one of those markets has got several dozen, well,
The question will Be, is that capturable?
That's the, that's the problem.
That's the problem with much of this setting fees
proportionate to revenue or turnover,
is the data is simply not available, um, in a,
in a independent reliable sense.
Well though you're saying it's all administered
through six, seven territory tial authority.
So presumably each of those
authorities would have that information.
No, I mean, I just admit,
Always assume the authorities talk to each other.
Yes. Um, any other questions? Yeah,
Yeah. One of those just on the 2014
Act,
do you know if it's ever been amended?
There's been actual
Minor amendments around That's right.
Uh, recall
and traceability under the food safety law reform. Okay.
Yeah. There was flexibility though within the act
to adjust some areas like the schedules, which do deal
with things like the risk assessments and
Oh, okay. So, so a lot of
it could be done through RES
Or, and council for instance. That's helpful. Thank
You. Tell me, if there was an
outbreak
of food poisoning in the Nelson
Market And from one of these, you know, fruit carts,
would that end up on your desk?
So would it end up, sorry, would it
End up on your desk?
Um, if it was sizeable, yes it would.
Um, so in the first instance, the, the council would deal
with it, um, along with the public health, uh, folk locally.
Um, if the, you know, the extent of it gets, uh, large.
You remember last year we had the, um,
Canterbury University Halls of residence outbreak.
Hmm. So technically that was registered
through the local council, but the scale of it
and the public interest was so great that we got
directly involved in Yes, it did land on my desk desk.
Alright. Look, I'm sorry.
We, we've got other submitters coming.
So all about fascinating.
Um, and it's, so we,
we enjoy being on this committee 'cause boy, we learn a lot.
So, uh, thank you for your time
and if there's anything else we do need, um, we'll sure.
You'll, um, as a result of our discussions.
But thank you for your time. Much appreciated.
Um, ministry of Regulation
welcome D Hunting.
Yes. Um, it's just this,
the first time the ministry's come to the committee,
this were, it's, we were wondering with, well,
let's get the Ministry of Regulation along.
So ministry. So Kia, um, hi, I'm Paul Dante.
I'm the Deputy Chief PC of reviews system,
capability at Domestic Regulation.
And this is Charlie, um, Huley, who's a senior advisor
and the, um, response team.
Um, firstly, um, so we haven't had any engagement.
I got to seal the paperwork. Um,
the committee gave the engaged us to actually look
and which we have done.
So, um, I was very impressed that one your submission
and two, your presentations, the committee.
So well done. Um, I, as, uh, Mr. Fleming kind
of acknowledged, um, no small task, uh, to take this on
for the period of time you have, um,
the fact you have 1500 people,
just under 15 people sign your petition.
Impressive. Um, we've had, um,
an additional 23 formal submissions into a retake call We
have, um, around the small food business
and the costs of compliance for them.
Um, Tracy has seen that is one
of these submitters we just met out in the call.
Um, so, so the thing is, we've got a number
of data points around this.
Um, I just thought, give a bit of context around the,
the Mercy regulation Retake portal.
It's essentially a really easy to use form
where anyone can raise three, three issues.
We've had a 700 since we opened it in mid-November. Uh, 23.
23 of those have been related to small food businesses
and the compliance costs associated with that.
So it's about 3%. Um, as leaders, you know, the ministry
with, there's kind of four roles in this rehab.
One of them is actually, I'm not Congress anymore,
but one of 'em is around improving regulation.
And they can, uh, uh, look at essentially is
it, uh, appropriate?
You know, it doesn't need to be tweaked, should be removed.
Do we need exemptions? Whatever.
It's, um, so when we look at these, the things that come in,
um, some things we can look at pretty quickly.
Other things require, um, bit worth it.
And so we have these big things called regulatory reviews.
And you may have heard of the, um,
early Child Educational Review, which took about, you know,
seven months and it's going through relevant processes, uh,
and the video at the moment,
um, around the decisions around this.
So they're more substantial things.
The small things that come into the portal, we look at those
and we group them up, we look at them, we've engaged
with a number of the small, um, food businesses
that have raised issues with us, um,
and kind of determine is this something
that we can actually pull in levers on.
Um, we've had, um, I suppose the other thing that we bring
to parties we're independent and I suppose some
of the things that Ben was talking about there around,
you know, NPI maybe potentially captured
'cause they're the regulator and the educator, um,
we bring in independent lens.
So we have looked at, I suppose some of the submission.
Um, we've looked at the food lead that's coming in
and I think, you know, has acknowledged it.
Um, it does seem disproportionate.
And and that's the conclusion we came to
after we looked at it for smooth small food businesses.
Um, so then you go, what's the solution then?
Um, and that solution obviously needs to sit with NPI
and the minister 'cause they, they're responsible
for administering the act and to setting those levies.
And we've had conversations with the NPI, um,
and I think they've shown a, a real, uh, desire to kind
of understand the problem and trying to move where they can.
Um, without a doubt. Um, I think, you know, the,
the levy has been adapted, uh, uh, adjusted a little bit
around if there's multiple, um, sites in terms
of you've got a food truck and you've got a home base,
you charge two levy.
So they, they'll moving on those things.
So there's some movement, is there more movement required?
Um, I suspect that would be, uh, advisable.
Um, but the thing is they need to work
through their process in terms of over, um,
and any p are doing that review.
Um, in terms of from a ministry regulations perspective, um,
you know, we're not technically experts.
We are regulatory experts I guess.
And so we kind of look at things at a very system level.
'cause from that reset portal we've got 700 submissions.
Um, there are clearly some things there
that when you group them together, maybe a system review
and you could argue, you know, is the food act up
for a system review, um, or a, a review.
And that's not for us. Soon we provide advice
through the reation and those decisions are made.
Were cabinet ultimately around where those reviews are.
And there's only been four reviews today
and, uh, early, early childhood education, cultural, uh,
and cultural products here, here, zi.
And the latest one we just started is
around the telecommunication sector.
Um, so that's kind of where all that's at.
Um, I'll just take any questions. I'll keep you short.
Alright, thank you.
So although you said you're ready, experts
and obviously not food experts.
Correct. However, to be able to, you need some expertise
to be able to know whether the regulations are pertinent
shouldn't be, which will be around food.
Yeah. So where is the, um, where is, how
Do you make those distinctions? How
do you make them, well, no, not distinction.
Where do you join those two? Yeah.
Also the thing is, with all the work that we do,
we always engage with the regulator
and the regulator parties.
'cause we acknowledge that we are looking at the
telecommunications stuff at the moment.
We are not telecommunications experts as we try
to balance those things out
and we look at overseas jurisdictions as well.
So like in this instance, for example, we're well aware,
like in some states in both Australia
and America, there are, um, exemptions in place for, um,
low risk, low volume, um, food businesses.
So there are, we look at those overseas jurisdictions
to compare, are we comparative to what's happening overseas?
If you look at all those things as well, um, you, you know,
there are experts in all these areas
and those experts, you know,
they take a certain lens to things.
Um, and that lens is based on their level of expertise.
In some ways it's good to have, uh,
a slightly more independent view of things
as well, which is what we bring.
We bring some, a level of challenge.
Alright. Members further questions?
Yeah. So can you just, I know you've touched on this,
but just I'm really clear.
What what would be your next steps here
in terms of engaging with this?
Um, so, so on this, so what we have done is we,
we've had discussions with NBI
'cause we have a range of
things that have come through the portal.
Yeah. Um, so on the Agricultural
Products Review, so we're engaging with them.
Um, and I sit on the same governance group format.
Um, and so there's conversations to take place there.
So we have had conversations with our minister.
So, uh, there are different, uh, courses of action
that the minister can take in terms of engaging
with the relevant minister to have those conversations.
'cause it comes down to what are the priorities
of the minister in terms of where do they want
to spend their time and effort and is there something,
and so those conversations take place.
Um, as I said before, there is the potential
that something like this, not this specifically,
but a broader review of the, um, of the food, uh, sector,
um, could take place.
And so we have a, a list of things
that potentially are worthwhile looking at
that go through cabinet.
Um, and they make a decision on which one they
wanna select. Okay.
So you don't have a power recommendation, power no power
to remove a regulation or roll for regulation yourself?
No, no. So the leaders sit with the respective minister,
not with, um, ministry for regulation
Question, but in a sense you're kind
of a bit like the ministry of truth
that you're more concerned
with deregulation than regulation.
So you could be called the ministry of deregulation more
Appropriately. I,
I wouldn't agree with that. Sorry.
Um, and I'll be very firm on that.
Uh, and I think Ben, thank me, um, in terms
of the start when, um, um, Mr.
Can asked the question around do you think there's no
regulation required, regulation is required, um,
it's the harm.
And, um, but I, you know, as a result of I suppose years
and years of, of new legislation regulation,
there has been layers and layers
and layers put on into New Zealand society.
And we need to look at that in a constructive way
to pull out what is no longer what's preventing
that productivity and growth.
So,
So can I just, just again, just to clarify, so gi,
given the fact that the jury
for regulation does exist now, we we are right.
And obviously this is why we invited you
to absolutely come here cigarette to meet you.
And so yeah, obviously follow
that piece of work that you do.
But I'm also hearing you say that if that, given
that you're essentially an, an advice shop, if
that advice doesn't lead somewhere, then, then, then
I guess we'd be back to where we would be if you, if,
if your ministry didn't exist, which is we'd be, um,
engaging directly with the NPI, uh, to um, explore a review
of the Food Act for example.
Yes. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Alright, just finally, chairman's prerogative,
do you see you developing some expertise in areas over time
where you'd probably have a food, uh, someone
who, who would more be more specialized in regulation
around food preparation, hygiene, health, et cetera?
That's not the way you would go?
No, I think we will stay as generals, um,
rather than getting into individual areas of expertise.
Um, you know, yeah, the reality is
if you look at the financial services sector,
the telecommunication sector, even the education sector,
they're notoriously complex
and you should rely on the expertise.
Um, however, it's nice to have some people who come along
and challenge some of the thinking.
And that's essentially what we're doing.
And it's what we've done with the
agricultural cultural products review.
Um, there are significant, um, recommendations coming out of
that review that will have material
impacts in New Zealand economy.
Um, and they wouldn't have occurred
if we didn't undertake that review. Um, so
Thank you. Yeah, I'll,
I'll put my hand of a poor chairmanship
that we actually turn this to a little bit
more knowledge about your industry.
Yeah. And, and that's alright. We
May have gone, but every, everything
is joined up as we know.
So, and we do take out systems view and so,
and I, I refer back to Ben, I'm like, really impressed.
We, I said a hundred submissions,
the portal one while come directly more impressed. The,
Alright, well that's what we, we encourage the direction
between our submitters, so
that's great. It's been taken literally
Everybody go just charge who's paying,
Who's paying for the coffee by the way, Vince? Alright,
Thanks. Thanks,
Thanks very much everyone.
That's much appreciated. Um,
and I think it was probably, I'd have to put that down
as one of our more interesting, um, topics.
And so thanks for bringing it to our attention, Ben,
and, uh, and for all the agencies make themselves available
and which I know is a very busy time. Thank you.
Thank you. You Now we are still in public,
so you're welcome to stay for our next, um, presenter.
Um, is that, is he
Coming in online or Not?
Right. Okay, welcome. We're nearly on
3 55. Must
share. Thanks very much. Thanks
Everyone.
The power extends We'll probably we'll probably see a
bit more of you, I suspect now than we know what you do.
Thanks. Appreciate
a big pair of scissors.
Morning are you, you suddenly out?
It's because it's now we have, uh, Mr. Allen.
Yes. Good afternoon. We do. Hello,
You, You're our lead here.
Mr. Allen. Now have you got, is it me
that can't quite hear or is it,
Can you hear me?
That's good. Yeah. Okay.
Yeah, no, that's good. Good actually.
Alright, now we've got you,
you've got the petitions committee here.
I won't, we're just doing a couple
of changeovers here at the moment.
Um, did you hear, were you watching the first, the,
the previous submission?
I caught the last five minutes of it. Oh,
Okay. Well, Greg
O'Connor, I'm the chair.
Greg Fleming. I'm Paula Garcia.
Um, new Lynn in Auckland
Tiwi Grand Party.
Pleasure to meet you. Thank you.
All right, so now, um, Zane,
we've got you here for 10 minutes.
Uh, you can take your petitions read,
but, uh, it would be good if you speak to your petition
and, uh, or your submission
and, uh, leave time for questions. Thank you.
And I appreciate the chance to speak today. Um, I have,
I just, can I just say, just with these,
if you can refrain from making accusations against
particular individuals or even companies would be helpful
because it's, uh,
we it's the natural justice type thing there.
Okay. Okay. No problems.
Um, so I'm actually here on behalf of tens of thousands
of concern New Zealanders.
Uh, we're actually calling for the government
to place an immediate moratorium on geo engineering
and weather modification activities in New Zealand.
Uh, while an interve, uh, sorry, an independent
investigation is conducted, uh, this is with the, uh, goal
of banning these practices entirely as already done in
Tennessee and Florida.
Uh, in fact, last night I was reading the government's hand
side transcript from June 15th, 2010.
Session number eight, the topic was, uh, aerial spraying,
uh, where the Clear Skies Action Group submitted a petition
calling on the government
to stop the spraying seen across New Zealand skies.
Uh, they voiced concern that aluminum, barium
and strontium were being released from
aircraft across our country.
Um, I actually remember seeing this for myself.
Um, it was briefly discussed in the house,
and that was done by Dr.
Nick Smith, uh, the then Minister for the environment.
And, uh, he laughed it out, parliament, um,
labeling it a conspiracy theory.
That was 15 years ago.
And, uh, the,
the position from the government hasn't changed at all
despite, uh, hundreds of, uh, of, of, uh,
requests through to, um,
to various government departments asking
what, what are we seeing?
Uh, this is years
of visual obs observations from the public.
So it's not like we are, uh, you know, you know,
there's a lot of us seeing this, um,
and it's happening all over the world.
So the general response is the
same from all the governments.
It's like a carefully crafted script that, uh,
that people are seeing.
Uh, you know, what we're seeing is contraras and, uh,
and an increase in, in aircraft activity.
And that's the reason, and that's what what we're seeing.
But, uh, what's happening is we are actually documenting
and doing tests from the rain itself,
and we are, we are getting, um, elevated levels of aluminum,
barium and strontium.
Um, and that actually lines up with the patents
for geoengineering and weather modification practices.
So, uh, you know, we are concerned, the government seems
to be just, uh, you know,
dismissing our concerns altogether.
Um, and in fact, um, we've got proof now
that atmos from an atmospheric scientist, uh, Louis j Batan,
uh, has published studies confirming contrails can't
actually can't persist at commercial altitudes
unless chemicals are introduced
because the atmosphere is too dry.
Um, so again, this is aligning directly with if you,
we've been studying the patents
and that's what the patents are telling us that, uh,
you know, that, uh, that this is what's going on
and happening with other geoengineering
programs around the world.
So since 2010, as I mentioned, uh, we've,
we've lodged complaints with niwa, civil Aviation Authority
Ministry for the environment, EPA, uh, as well
as other, um, agencies.
Yet, um, after doing official Information Act request,
not a single complaint has been investigated.
So, you know, we're asking why, especially when we are,
you know, we are documenting all this evidence.
We only have to look up, uh, you know, and,
and see things aren't right.
Things aren't how they used to be, you know,
and something's changed
and it's all lines up with what we are learning about,
which is geoengineering and weather modification.
So, um, this raises urgent questions.
Why have our complaints and observations
and tests being ignored, um,
why does the government insist these are normal contras
without commissioning any independent testing?
Uh, and how can the government justify ignoring public
health and environmental concerns when our lab tests
actually prove toxic metals are present?
Um, so every department we speak to denies it outright.
They says, we don't hold any information on that,
or it's not happening.
Um, and so we must ask who is responsible, you know,
who is it that, 'cause we're seeing it,
it matches up with the patents.
Um, so is it foreign actors?
You know, are they operating without
parliamentary knowledge?
Um, our international programs operating without public
consent because they're becoming public now.
Um, you know, over in the US
and the UK we've got, uh, bill Gates with a SCX program
and there's a new one called, uh, Satan, uh, typical,
you know, just happens to be called Satan, uh, which is,
uh, done in the uk.
So, you know, we, we are being told to believe that, um,
you know, are we actually being told to believe that tens of
thousands of citizens and lab reports and patents are wrong?
'cause that's basically what you're telling us.
Um, so at the heart of this issue is that, you know,
like we're talking about toxic chemicals, aluminum, barium
and strontium are being released into our atmosphere.
Peer reviews studies actually show these programs post
serious risk to human health animals
and ecosystems that affects your families too.
Um, and you know, so, um, this is not a fringe concern.
It's a national issue. It needs discussing.
Uh, it needs to go into parliament
because every New Zealander has the right
to a safe environment
and, uh, you know, full transparency over what's being done
in, you know, to our skies, our soil,
and to our bodies, you know?
So, um, in fact, Robert F. Kennedy Jr.
Has, uh, been on television.
Uh, obviously he's a member of the US government.
He confirms that these programs are actually happening.
So it, it doesn't get, you know, any,
any stronger than that.
Um, you know, so, and then you've gotten the USA, Tennessee
and Florida have recently passed legislation banning it,
so it's obviously happening if they're banning it.
So we would like to mirror those, uh,
what they're doing over there for here in New Zealand.
Um, so even if it's not happening and,
and the government still wants to deny it, there's,
there should be no reason why legislation is put in place
to ban it regardless.
So that way we've got peace of mind.
It puts the tens of thousands of people
who are observing this and are sick of it.
And, you know, it's affecting us and our families
and our lives and our quality of our lives.
Uh, you know, at least
that puts gives us some peace of mind.
Um, so it is no longer a conspiracy theory,
it's an admitted fact now.
And, um, the refusal to investigate it, um, leaves a vacuum.
And that vacuum is, you know, it's concern, speculation,
and that's how distrust grows.
So, you know, we're not asking for a favor.
We're actually asserting our right
to know what's being done in our skies, you know,
protect our health and environment
and we demand transparency and accountability.
So therefore I call on Parliament
to immediately impose moratorium on all geoengineering
and weather mod modification activities,
commission full independent investigation,
including public consultation
and enact a full legislative ban like Tennessee and Florida.
We New Zealanders, uh, all deserve the truth.
This affects the air we breathe,
the environment and our health.
It can no longer be dismissed.
Public trust is on the line
and the government has a moral duty to protect
the people it serves.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you Zane.
Um, members, any questions? Yes, Mr.
Fl? Yeah, thanks Zane. I just, a couple questions.
You mentioned that you, uh, had made OIA requests. Yes.
Um, where, where did that lead?
Well, basically two denials that it's not happening.
So, you know, we've contacted all the, the governing bodies
for geoengineering
or you know, where it gets sent to here in, in New Zealand,
which is niwa, the, uh, EPA, the Ministry
for the environment and the CAA, so contacting any of them,
they just all just give us denials.
It's not happening. New Zealand doesn't do it, you know,
and we don't hold any information on that,
you know, that sort of thing.
But, um, you know, so, you know, that doesn't line up with
what we're seeing again in the skies.
I mean, thousands of, uh, as people, millions of people
around the world are noticing it,
but we're, we're getting the same response.
So something is obviously going on that, uh, you know,
that's happening underhanded
and, uh, it's, it's obviously a,
a national security classified operation or whatever it is,
but, you know, even so, um, we need a thorough invest
investigation 'cause our, our lives are at
risk here. You know, we're talking about
Zane, I'm, we we're, we're starting to run short of time,
but just so if I just, just if you got time for a couple
of quick one of them was, I, I note you said
that you've got evidence that the, um, normal trails,
um, don't occur.
Yes. Nationally. Yes.
Um, it's only so, so does that mean that there's every
vapor trail we see in the sky is a chem trail? Well,
I'm, I'm not a prof, I'm not a, uh,
you know, scientist myself.
I'm just going off the research that's available.
That's public research.
And we've found documented studies showing that, um, the air
where, where we are seeing these trails are,
are from commercial aircraft.
Uh, the science is telling us if they're gonna expand
and persist and turn into weather and,
and, uh, you know, the only way that can happen at, at,
at those altitudes because the atmosphere is too dry
and the relatively, the relative humidity is too low.
Chemicals need to be added. And that lines up perfectly with
what, what's being said in the patents for geoengineering.
That, that, for that to happen.
That's what's happening, you know?
And, uh, so, so that, that's the answer to that.
Alright, well, members, any other questions? No, I'm good.
Thank you. No, I think that's all we've got.
We've also got, got your documentation here, so, uh,
Right. Have we got
time for the other ladies
just to have a brief chat? 'cause they've prepared
Oh, very, very brief.
I'm sorry. You, you, you, you, you okay.
You, you, you gave it a pretty
good shot yourself there, Zane.
But we've just got time for p to introduce yourself
and any very short additional information. Alright.
Can I just hand over to, uh, Robina please?
If that's possible.
I've got Ena and G Gabriel. Yeah.
Uh, your question around the, what we see in the sky
and is it, are they all contras?
Some of them are Contras and some of 'em are quite legit,
but some of them aren't.
And it's, it, the big determining factor is the difference
between the two of these.
And I have all the evidence, like I've done a lot
of research on it and I do
understand the difference between them.
But on this, we just haven't got the time
to explain it here, which is why we want to, we're
after the parliamentary full opportunity
to present it to you.
Alright, thanks. And
Gabriel, did you want to have a quick,
I just, um, I would like to add in there
that in the UK they're conducting a large scale geo
engineering test, such as, um,
stratospheric aerosol injection
and marine cloud brightening without public
consent or proven safety.
So I just wanted to let use know, didn't know
that knee nwas collaboration
with the UK Met office raises serious concerns about New
Zealand's involvement in these activities.
So elevated levels of aluminum barium
and strontium, like, um, saying, said, um, are linked
to health risk and have been detected in our environment.
So it's is also important to note
that New Zealand contributes less than 1%
of global greenhouse gas emissions.
So this means geoengineering is not necessary or,
or a justified approach for, um, New Zealand.
Instead we shall focus on transparent, democratic
and safe environmental policies.
So I'll just like to call on the committee quickly to,
in impose an immediate moratorium, um,
like zza into on j engineering research as well,
and launch an independent inquiry into chemical
contamination linked to these activities.
So that's what I, I'd love to say. Thank you.
Alright, thank you. Alright, look, thank you. Thank you.
Very quite succinct
and, um, we'll, uh, the committee now will, um,
look at the evidence and we'll, uh,
we'll report back to Parliament.
Thank, thank you very much.